---
layout: post
title: "4D Games: Dev-log Update 1"
description: "Breaking down the experiment from my final year dissertation and building an interactive series of games exploring the fourth dimension with ray marching."
unity_dir: 4dgames-demo
logo: 
  path: "title-Final.png"
  alt: "4d-games-logo"
---

<p style="text-align: justify">
The experiment from my final year university dissertation contained three challenges: Shape matching, rotation matching, and pose matching. these 3 modes will be refined, allowing users to customise the difficulty and apply extensions to the 3D cross section.

<p style="text-align: justify">
Along side these three challenges, two playground modes will be released, allowing users to rotate and explore the cross sections of multiple shapes in 4D and 3D. Users will be allowed to rotate these shapes, explore along the w axis, and enable continuous planes of rotation to observe how the cross sections of geometry behave in 4D. 
</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">
The above demo shows a brand new main menu with some 4D shapes in the background, and the panels that take you too each mode. The functionality for the games has not yet been implemented, although you can explore a 3D and 4D cube. Using left click you can rotate objects in 3D, and left click allows you to rotate objects in 4D. Hold the x, y and z keys to restrict the planes of rotation. You can also press the space bar to reset the orientation.
</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">
The shapes are rendered with ray marching, meaning each object and their rotation has to be calculated for every pixel every frame. In browsers especially, this can cause some lag. If you do not full screen the game, it will likely run quite smoothly. This game will be released on PC, meaning the performance should be much better, with the use of a GPU.
</p>